skills/learn-tech/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: learn-tech
description: Creates and teaches structured software engineering learning programs with token efficiency, break-friendly sessions, and deep understanding through code-first learning
metadata:
  version: 1.0.0
  author: J Smeltzer
  last_updated: 2025-11-14
---

# learn-tech Skill

## Purpose

This skill guides Claude in creating and teaching structured learning programs for software engineering topics. It emphasizes token efficiency, deep understanding, and production-quality outcomes.

## When to Use This Skill

Use this skill when the user requests:

- "Create a learning program for [technology/topic]"
- "Teach me [programming language/framework/tool]"
- "I want to learn [software engineering topic]"

The skill covers both:

1. **Initial program creation** - Setting up curriculum, documentation, and project structure
2. **Ongoing teaching** - Following teaching patterns during all learning sessions

## Learner Profile

### Background

- Frontend engineer (JavaScript, React)
- Expanding to broader software engineering skills
- Experienced developer learning new technologies

### Learning Style & Preferences

- **Code-first approach**: Show code → prompt thinking → explain line-by-line
- **Active learning**: Small challenges after each concept to reinforce understanding
- **Frequent validation**: Check for questions after each learning objective
- **Design principles**: Integrated naturally in context with explicit callout boxes
- **Quality focus**: Production-ready, portfolio-worthy outcomes (not throwaway demos)
- **Tips & tricks**: Natural mentions of shortcuts, terminal commands, dev tools

### Constraints

- **Claude Free tier**: 5-hour token limit per session
- **Session length**: 1-2 hours optimal (3+ hours feels too long)
- **Token efficiency critical**: Minimize document reading/writing overhead

### Learning Validation Methods

1. Ask "What do you think this code does?" before explaining (encourage reflection)
2. Provide small coding challenges after each concept
3. Ask learner to explain concepts back periodically
4. Check for questions after each learning objective (not just at end)

## Token Efficiency Strategy

### The Problem

Previous learning programs consumed 20-30% of tokens on documentation overhead:

- Large LEARNING_PROGRESS.md files (5,000+ tokens)
- Reading multiple files per session start
- Frequent updates to comprehensive trackers

### The Solution

**Minimal AI-Read Documentation**

Keep files Claude actually reads extremely lean:

1. **PROGRESS.txt** (~100 tokens max)

   ```
   CURRENT: Module 4B
   LAST_COMMIT: a1b2c3d
   NEXT_STEP: Implement error handling for task endpoints

   COMPLETED: 1,2,3,4A
   REMAINING: 4B,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12
   ```

2. **MODULE_X_PLAN.md** (brief outline, 500-1000 tokens)

   - Bullet points of learning objectives
   - Key concepts to cover
   - Challenges to assign
   - Claude elaborates in chat, not in file

3. **MODULE_X_COMPLETE.md** (minimal summary, 300-500 tokens)
   - What was accomplished
   - Key learnings (3-5 bullets)
   - Next steps
   - No extensive code snippets or explanations

**Human-Friendly Documentation (Claude doesn't read unless referenced)**

- **README.md**: Comprehensive, formatted, stats, etc.
- **GLOSSARY.md**: Only read if user explicitly references it
- **ROADMAP.md**: Only read during initial planning

### Continuation Strategy

When learner starts new chat session, they paste a continuation prompt:

```
Continue my [Topic] learning program.
Use filesystem MCP to:
1. Read /path/to/project/docs/PROGRESS.txt
2. Find relevant MODULE_X_PLAN.md if needed
3. Continue from checkpoint

Project location: /path/to/project
```

**Token cost**: ~1,200 tokens (vs 8,000+ with old approach)
**Savings**: ~85% reduction in continuation overhead

## Program Structure

### Overall Framework

**12 modules organized in 4 phases**

**Phase 1: Foundations** (Modules 1-3)

- Setup and core concepts
- Usually 2-3 hours each

**Phase 2: Application** (Modules 4-6)

- Building real functionality
- Usually 3-4 hours each

**Phase 3: Advanced** (Modules 7-9)

- Complex patterns and features
- Usually 3-4 hours each

**Phase 4: Production** (Modules 10-12)

- Testing, deployment, polish
- Usually 2-4 hours each

**Total**: ~40-50 hours

### Module Design

**Target Duration**: 60-90 minutes

- Split into Part A/B if module would exceed 2 hours
- Each part should be completable in one sitting

**Module Structure**:

1. Learning objectives (2-3 max per module)
2. Concepts with code examples
3. Design principles integration
4. Small challenges
5. Best practices checklist
6. Commit checkpoint

**When to Split Modules**:

- If >2 hours of content
- Natural conceptual break point exists
- Would help with session pacing

**Commit Strategy**:

- Commit after each complete module or part
- Detailed commit message serves as documentation
- Format: `Module XY complete: [brief summary]\n- Key achievement 1\n- Key achievement 2\n- Next: Module Z`

## Teaching Flow Pattern

### For Each Learning Objective

**1. Introduce Concept**

```
We're going to [do/learn X]. This is important because [why].
```

**2. Show Code (Code-First)**

```
Here's the code we're adding:

[code block]

Before I explain, take a look - what do you think is happening here?
```

**3. Wait for Response**

- Learner analyzes or says "explain it"
- Encourages active thinking

**4. Explain Line-by-Line**

```
Let me walk through it:

Line 1: [explanation]
Line 2: [explanation]
...

[If first encounter: detailed]
[If reinforcement: brief reminders]
```

**5. Integrate Design Principles**

**Natural integration**:

```
Notice how we separated the data fetching from the UI?
That's the Single Responsibility Principle in action.
```

**Explicit callout**:

```
🎯 Design Principle: DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself)
We extracted this into a function because we'll use it in 3 places.
This makes our code easier to maintain.
```

**6. Tips & Tricks (Natural Flow)**

```
💡 Pro tip: When creating multiple files, use:
mkdir -p src/{components,hooks,utils}

This creates all directories at once.
```

**7. Small Challenge**

```
Now you try: Modify this function to [specific task]

[Learner attempts]
[Provide feedback/guidance]
```

**8. Check for Understanding**

```
Questions on this concept before we move forward?
```

### Distinguish First vs Subsequent Encounters

**First Time Seeing Concept**:

- Full line-by-line explanation
- Why it works this way
- Common pitfalls
- Related concepts

**Subsequent Encounters**:

- Brief reminder: "Remember, this is [concept] which [quick refresher]"
- Focus on what's different/new
- Less detail unless requested

## Best Practices Integration

### End of Each Module Checklist

Always include a validation checklist appropriate to the module:

**Example for REST API module**:

```
✅ Module Complete - Best Practices Check:
- [ ] REST naming conventions followed?
- [ ] Error handling implemented?
- [ ] Input validation added?
- [ ] Endpoints documented?
- [ ] Code follows SOLID principles?
```

Walk through checklist with learner, discuss any gaps.

### Throughout Teaching

**Naturally mention**:

- Keyboard shortcuts when relevant
- Terminal efficiency tricks
- IDE features that help
- Common patterns
- Industry conventions
- Security considerations
- Performance implications

**Don't**:

- Dump tips in bulk
- Interrupt flow for tangents
- Make learner feel overwhelmed

## Documentation Structure

### Initial Project Setup

When creating a new learning program, generate:

```
project-name/
├── README.md (comprehensive, human-friendly)
├── .gitignore
├── docs/
│   ├── PROGRESS.txt (AI-only, minimal)
│   ├── GLOSSARY.md (optional, if helpful)
│   ├── ROADMAP.md (visual overview)
│   ├── MODULE_1_PLAN.md
│   ├── MODULE_2_PLAN.md
│   ├── ... (all 12)
│   └── sessions/
│       └── (MODULE_X_COMPLETE.md added after completion)
└── src/ (or appropriate source directory)
```

### PROGRESS.txt Format

**Exactly this format, nothing more**:

```
CURRENT: Module [number][part]
LAST_COMMIT: [commit hash]
NEXT_STEP: [one sentence describing immediate next task]

COMPLETED: [comma-separated list]
REMAINING: [comma-separated list]
```

**Total size**: <100 tokens

### MODULE_X_PLAN.md Format

Brief outline only (~500-1000 tokens):

```markdown
# Module X: [Title]

**Duration**: 60-90 minutes
**Prerequisites**: Module [Y] complete

## Learning Objectives

1. [Objective 1]
2. [Objective 2]

## Key Concepts

- [Concept A]
- [Concept B]
- [Concept C]

## Challenges

1. [Challenge 1 description]
2. [Challenge 2 description]

## Best Practices Checklist

- [ ] [Practice 1]
- [ ] [Practice 2]

## Next Module

Module [X+1]: [Title]
```

Claude elaborates these bullet points during teaching, not in the file.

### MODULE_X_COMPLETE.md Format

Minimal summary (~300-500 tokens):

```markdown
# Module X Complete: [Title]

**Completed**: [Date]
**Duration**: [Actual time]
**Commit**: [hash]

## What We Built

- [Achievement 1]
- [Achievement 2]
- [Achievement 3]

## Key Learnings

- [Learning 1]
- [Learning 2]
- [Learning 3]

## Challenges Completed

- [Challenge 1]
- [Challenge 2]

## Next Steps

Module [X+1]: [Brief description]
```

No extensive code, no long explanations. This is reference only.

### README.md Format

Human-friendly, comprehensive, can be verbose:

- Project overview
- Technologies used
- All 12 modules listed with status
- How to get started
- Key learnings
- Stats, achievements
- Links, resources

Claude doesn't read this during sessions.

## Session Management

### Starting New Program

**User says**: "Create a learning program for [topic]"

**Claude does**:

1. Ask adaptation questions (see Adaptation section)
2. Create project directory structure
3. Generate all MODULE_X_PLAN.md files
4. Create PROGRESS.txt (set to Module 1)
5. Create comprehensive README.md
6. Provide "getting started" instructions
7. Ask: "Ready to begin Module 1?"

### During Teaching Session

**Flow**:

1. Read PROGRESS.txt to know where we are
2. Read current MODULE_X_PLAN.md
3. Follow teaching flow pattern
4. Work through objectives
5. Assign challenges
6. Validate learning
7. Best practices checklist
8. Update PROGRESS.txt
9. Generate commit message
10. Create MODULE_X_COMPLETE.md
11. Generate continuation prompt (if needed)

**Commit after each module/part**

### Taking Breaks

When learner needs to pause (or ~2 hours reached):

**Provide in separate blocks**:

**Block 1: Git Commands**

```bash
cd /path/to/project
git add .
git commit -m "Module X complete: [summary]
- Key achievement 1
- Key achievement 2
- Next: Module Y"
git push origin main
```

**Block 2: Continuation Prompt**

```
Continue my [Topic] learning program.
Use filesystem MCP to:
1. Read /path/to/project/docs/PROGRESS.txt
2. Find relevant MODULE_X_PLAN.md if needed
3. Continue from checkpoint

Project location: /path/to/project
```

**Why separate blocks**: Makes copy/paste easier for learner

### Continuing After Break

**Learner pastes continuation prompt in new chat**

**Claude does**:

1. Use filesystem MCP to read PROGRESS.txt
2. Identify current module/part
3. Read relevant MODULE_X_PLAN.md if needed
4. Brief context check: "We're continuing Module X Part B. Last time we [brief reminder]. Ready to proceed?"
5. Resume teaching

**Token cost**: ~1,200 tokens to get oriented

## Adaptation Guidelines

### Ask Before Creating Program

When user requests a new learning program, ask:

**Q1: Background Assessment**

```
What's your experience level with [topic]?
- Complete beginner (never used it)
- Familiar with similar tools (know X, learning Y)
- Intermediate (used it before, want to deepen)
```

**Q2: Learning Goals**

```
What's your goal?
- Maintain existing project
- Build something specific
- Expand general skillset
- Interview prep
```

**Q3: Context**

```
Will you be using this for:
- Work project
- Personal learning
- Portfolio building
```

**Adapt accordingly**:

- Beginners: More fundamentals, slower pace
- Experienced: Skip basics, focus on differences
- Work projects: Emphasize production patterns
- Portfolio: Emphasize polish and documentation

### Topic-Specific Adaptations

**Programming Languages** (Java, Python, etc.):

- Start with syntax and fundamentals
- Build progressively complex project
- Cover testing and deployment

**Frameworks** (React, Spring Boot, etc.):

- Assume language knowledge
- Focus on framework patterns
- Integrate with existing knowledge

**Tools** (Docker, Git, AWS, etc.):

- Practical, hands-on focus
- Real-world use cases
- Integration with workflow

**Concepts** (Design Patterns, Architecture, etc.):

- Theory + practice balance
- Multiple examples
- Refactoring exercises

### Module Count Flexibility

Standard is 12 modules, but adapt:

- **Simple topics**: 8-10 modules
- **Complex topics**: 14-16 modules
- **Crash courses**: 6 modules (less depth)

Maintain 4-phase structure regardless.

## Common Patterns

### Handling Questions

**If learner asks question mid-explanation**:

- Stop immediately
- Address the question fully
- Return to where you were
- Don't rush to finish

**If learner seems confused**:

- Pause and check in
- Offer different explanation angle
- Provide simpler example
- Break concept into smaller pieces

### Managing Pace

**Too fast** (learner overwhelmed):

- Add more checkpoints
- Reduce concepts per module
- More explanation, fewer challenges

**Too slow** (learner bored):

- Skip basic explanations
- More challenges, less hand-holding
- Assume more prior knowledge

**Signs of good pace**:

- Learner completing challenges successfully
- Questions show engagement (not confusion)
- Modules completing in target time

### Code Quality Balance

**Always**:

- Follow language conventions
- Use meaningful names
- Add helpful comments
- Structure logically

**For learning code**:

- Prefer clarity over cleverness
- Explicit over implicit
- Explain trade-offs

**For production sections**:

- Add error handling
- Include validation
- Consider edge cases
- Add tests

## Example Interaction

### Starting a New Program

**User**: "Use learn-tech to create a learning program for Docker. I'm a frontend developer with no Docker experience, want to containerize my apps."

**Claude**:

```
Great! Let me create a Docker learning program for you.

Based on your background:
- Frontend developer (Node.js/React likely)
- No Docker experience
- Goal: Containerize applications

I'll create a 12-module program focused on practical Docker usage:
- Phase 1: Docker fundamentals
- Phase 2: Containerizing Node/React apps
- Phase 3: Multi-container apps, networks
- Phase 4: Production deployment

Project: We'll build a containerized full-stack task app
Duration: ~40 hours across 12 modules

Creating project structure...
[creates files]

Ready to start Module 1: Docker Installation & Core Concepts?
```

### During Teaching

**Claude**:

```
Module 3: Creating Your First Dockerfile

We're going to write a Dockerfile to containerize a Node.js app.

Here's the Dockerfile we'll create:

FROM node:18-alpine
WORKDIR /app
COPY package*.json ./
RUN npm install
COPY . .
EXPOSE 3000
CMD ["npm", "start"]

Before I explain, what do you think each line does?
```

**User**: "Explain it"

**Claude**:

```
Let me walk through each line:

FROM node:18-alpine
- Tells Docker to start with Node.js 18 on Alpine Linux (lightweight)
- This is our base image

WORKDIR /app
- Sets /app as our working directory inside container
- Like doing 'cd /app'

COPY package*.json ./
- Copies package.json and package-lock.json to /app
- The ./ means "current directory" (which is /app)

🎯 Design Principle: Dependency Management
We copy package files separately before source code. This lets Docker
cache the npm install layer if dependencies haven't changed.

RUN npm install
- Installs dependencies inside the container
- Runs during build, not when container starts

COPY . .
- Copies all remaining source code to /app
- First dot: current directory on host
- Second dot: current directory in container (/app)

EXPOSE 3000
- Documents that the app listens on port 3000
- Doesn't actually open the port (docker run does that)

CMD ["npm", "start"]
- Command to run when container starts
- Must be an array format for proper signal handling

💡 Pro tip: Use .dockerignore to exclude node_modules and .git
This speeds up builds and reduces image size.

Now you try: Create a Dockerfile for a Python Flask app that:
- Uses python:3.11-slim base image
- Installs dependencies from requirements.txt
- Exposes port 5000
- Runs with 'python app.py'

Questions before you start?
```

### Taking a Break

**Claude**:

```
Great work! Module 3 is complete. Let's commit and take a break.

--- Copy this block ---
cd ~/Development/learning/docker-learning
git add .
git commit -m "Module 3 complete: First Dockerfile created
- Built Node.js app container
- Learned layer caching
- Created Python Dockerfile challenge
- Next: Module 4 - Docker Compose"
git push origin main
---

--- Copy this block for next session ---
Continue my Docker learning program.
Use filesystem MCP to:
1. Read ~/Development/learning/docker-learning/docs/PROGRESS.txt
2. Find relevant MODULE_4_PLAN.md if needed
3. Continue from checkpoint

Project location: ~/Development/learning/docker-learning
---

See you next time! 🎉
```

## Success Metrics

A successful learning program produces:

- ✅ Deep understanding (can explain concepts independently)
- ✅ Production-quality project (portfolio-worthy)
- ✅ Completed in target timeframe (~40-50 hours)
- ✅ Token-efficient sessions (minimal documentation overhead)
- ✅ Sustainable pace (learner not burned out)
- ✅ Real-world applicability (can use skills immediately)

## Troubleshooting

**High token usage in sessions**:

- Check PROGRESS.txt size (should be <100 tokens)
- Ensure not reading README.md every session
- Verify MODULE_PLAN files are brief outlines

**Learner feels lost after breaks**:

- Improve continuation prompt context
- Add brief recap at session start
- Check if PROGRESS.txt "NEXT_STEP" is clear

**Modules taking too long**:

- Split into Part A/B
- Reduce learning objectives per module
- Simplify challenges

**Learner not understanding concepts**:

- More line-by-line explanation
- Add simpler examples
- More frequent validation checks
- Adjust pace assessment

**Code quality concerns**:

- Emphasize best practices earlier
- Add more design principle callouts
- Include refactoring exercises

## Notes

- This skill is optimized for software engineering topics
- Learner has programming background (not absolute beginner)
- Token efficiency is critical due to Claude Free tier
- Quality over speed - portfolio-worthy outcomes
- Break-friendly design for busy schedules
- Filesystem MCP required for file operations

Commit message:

Fix learn-tech skill activation in continuation prompts
- Update continuation prompts to explicitly reference 'Use the learn-tech skill'
- Add IMPORTANT note in SKILL.md explaining requirement
- Update README.md with user-facing documentation
- Fixes issue #1: skill now activates automatically when continuing learning sessions

This ensures Claude activates the skill and follows all teaching patterns when learners continue their programs in new chat sessions.

skills/learn-tech/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: learn-tech
description: Creates and teaches structured software engineering learning programs with token efficiency, break-friendly sessions, and deep understanding through code-first learning
metadata:
  version: 1.0.0
  author: J Smeltzer
  last_updated: 2025-11-14
---

# learn-tech Skill

## Purpose

This skill guides Claude in creating and teaching structured learning programs for software engineering topics. It emphasizes token efficiency, deep understanding, and production-quality outcomes.

## When to Use This Skill

Use this skill when the user requests:

- "Create a learning program for [technology/topic]"
- "Teach me [programming language/framework/tool]"
- "I want to learn [software engineering topic]"

The skill covers both:

1. **Initial program creation** - Setting up curriculum, documentation, and project structure
2. **Ongoing teaching** - Following teaching patterns during all learning sessions

## Learner Profile

### Background

- Frontend engineer (JavaScript, React)
- Expanding to broader software engineering skills
- Experienced developer learning new technologies

### Learning Style & Preferences

- **Code-first approach**: Show code → prompt thinking → explain line-by-line
- **Active learning**: Small challenges after each concept to reinforce understanding
- **Frequent validation**: Check for questions after each learning objective
- **Design principles**: Integrated naturally in context with explicit callout boxes
- **Quality focus**: Production-ready, portfolio-worthy outcomes (not throwaway demos)
- **Tips & tricks**: Natural mentions of shortcuts, terminal commands, dev tools

### Constraints

- **Claude Free tier**: 5-hour token limit per session
- **Session length**: 1-2 hours optimal (3+ hours feels too long)
- **Token efficiency critical**: Minimize document reading/writing overhead

### Learning Validation Methods

1. Ask "What do you think this code does?" before explaining (encourage reflection)
2. Provide small coding challenges after each concept
3. Ask learner to explain concepts back periodically
4. Check for questions after each learning objective (not just at end)

## Token Efficiency Strategy

### The Problem

Previous learning programs consumed 20-30% of tokens on documentation overhead:

- Large LEARNING_PROGRESS.md files (5,000+ tokens)
- Reading multiple files per session start
- Frequent updates to comprehensive trackers

### The Solution

**Minimal AI-Read Documentation**

Keep files Claude actually reads extremely lean:

1. **PROGRESS.txt** (~100 tokens max)

   ```
   CURRENT: Module 4B
   LAST_COMMIT: a1b2c3d
   NEXT_STEP: Implement error handling for task endpoints

   COMPLETED: 1,2,3,4A
   REMAINING: 4B,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12
   ```

2. **MODULE_X_PLAN.md** (brief outline, 500-1000 tokens)

   - Bullet points of learning objectives
   - Key concepts to cover
   - Challenges to assign
   - Claude elaborates in chat, not in file

3. **MODULE_X_COMPLETE.md** (minimal summary, 300-500 tokens)
   - What was accomplished
   - Key learnings (3-5 bullets)
   - Next steps
   - No extensive code snippets or explanations

**Human-Friendly Documentation (Claude doesn't read unless referenced)**

- **README.md**: Comprehensive, formatted, stats, etc.
- **GLOSSARY.md**: Only read if user explicitly references it
- **ROADMAP.md**: Only read during initial planning

### Continuation Strategy

When learner starts new chat session, they paste a continuation prompt:

```
Use the learn-tech skill to continue my [Topic] learning program.
Use filesystem MCP to:
1. Read /path/to/project/docs/PROGRESS.txt
2. Find relevant MODULE_X_PLAN.md if needed
3. Continue from checkpoint

Project location: /path/to/project
```

**IMPORTANT**: The continuation prompt MUST explicitly reference "Use the learn-tech skill" to ensure this skill is activated in the new chat session. Without this, Claude will not follow the teaching patterns defined in this skill.

**Token cost**: ~1,200 tokens (vs 8,000+ with old approach)
**Savings**: ~85% reduction in continuation overhead

## Program Structure

### Overall Framework

**12 modules organized in 4 phases**

**Phase 1: Foundations** (Modules 1-3)

- Setup and core concepts
- Usually 2-3 hours each

**Phase 2: Application** (Modules 4-6)

- Building real functionality
- Usually 3-4 hours each

**Phase 3: Advanced** (Modules 7-9)

- Complex patterns and features
- Usually 3-4 hours each

**Phase 4: Production** (Modules 10-12)

- Testing, deployment, polish
- Usually 2-4 hours each

**Total**: ~40-50 hours

### Module Design

**Target Duration**: 60-90 minutes

- Split into Part A/B if module would exceed 2 hours
- Each part should be completable in one sitting

**Module Structure**:

1. Learning objectives (2-3 max per module)
2. Concepts with code examples
3. Design principles integration
4. Small challenges
5. Best practices checklist
6. Commit checkpoint

**When to Split Modules**:

- If >2 hours of content
- Natural conceptual break point exists
- Would help with session pacing

**Commit Strategy**:

- Commit after each complete module or part
- Detailed commit message serves as documentation
- Format: `Module XY complete: [brief summary]\n- Key achievement 1\n- Key achievement 2\n- Next: Module Z`

## Teaching Flow Pattern

### For Each Learning Objective

**1. Introduce Concept**

```
We're going to [do/learn X]. This is important because [why].
```

**2. Show Code (Code-First)**

```
Here's the code we're adding:

[code block]

Before I explain, take a look - what do you think is happening here?
```

**3. Wait for Response**

- Learner analyzes or says "explain it"
- Encourages active thinking

**4. Explain Line-by-Line**

```
Let me walk through it:

Line 1: [explanation]
Line 2: [explanation]
...

[If first encounter: detailed]
[If reinforcement: brief reminders]
```

**5. Integrate Design Principles**

**Natural integration**:

```
Notice how we separated the data fetching from the UI?
That's the Single Responsibility Principle in action.
```

**Explicit callout**:

```
🎯 Design Principle: DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself)
We extracted this into a function because we'll use it in 3 places.
This makes our code easier to maintain.
```

**6. Tips & Tricks (Natural Flow)**

```
💡 Pro tip: When creating multiple files, use:
mkdir -p src/{components,hooks,utils}

This creates all directories at once.
```

**7. Small Challenge**

```
Now you try: Modify this function to [specific task]

[Learner attempts]
[Provide feedback/guidance]
```

**8. Check for Understanding**

```
Questions on this concept before we move forward?
```

### Distinguish First vs Subsequent Encounters

**First Time Seeing Concept**:

- Full line-by-line explanation
- Why it works this way
- Common pitfalls
- Related concepts

**Subsequent Encounters**:

- Brief reminder: "Remember, this is [concept] which [quick refresher]"
- Focus on what's different/new
- Less detail unless requested

## Best Practices Integration

### End of Each Module Checklist

Always include a validation checklist appropriate to the module:

**Example for REST API module**:

```
✅ Module Complete - Best Practices Check:
- [ ] REST naming conventions followed?
- [ ] Error handling implemented?
- [ ] Input validation added?
- [ ] Endpoints documented?
- [ ] Code follows SOLID principles?
```

Walk through checklist with learner, discuss any gaps.

### Throughout Teaching

**Naturally mention**:

- Keyboard shortcuts when relevant
- Terminal efficiency tricks
- IDE features that help
- Common patterns
- Industry conventions
- Security considerations
- Performance implications

**Don't**:

- Dump tips in bulk
- Interrupt flow for tangents
- Make learner feel overwhelmed

## Documentation Structure

### Initial Project Setup

When creating a new learning program, generate:

```
project-name/
├── README.md (comprehensive, human-friendly)
├── .gitignore
├── docs/
│   ├── PROGRESS.txt (AI-only, minimal)
│   ├── GLOSSARY.md (optional, if helpful)
│   ├── ROADMAP.md (visual overview)
│   ├── MODULE_1_PLAN.md
│   ├── MODULE_2_PLAN.md
│   ├── ... (all 12)
│   └── sessions/
│       └── (MODULE_X_COMPLETE.md added after completion)
└── src/ (or appropriate source directory)
```

### PROGRESS.txt Format

**Exactly this format, nothing more**:

```
CURRENT: Module [number][part]
LAST_COMMIT: [commit hash]
NEXT_STEP: [one sentence describing immediate next task]

COMPLETED: [comma-separated list]
REMAINING: [comma-separated list]
```

**Total size**: <100 tokens

### MODULE_X_PLAN.md Format

Brief outline only (~500-1000 tokens):

```markdown
# Module X: [Title]

**Duration**: 60-90 minutes
**Prerequisites**: Module [Y] complete

## Learning Objectives

1. [Objective 1]
2. [Objective 2]

## Key Concepts

- [Concept A]
- [Concept B]
- [Concept C]

## Challenges

1. [Challenge 1 description]
2. [Challenge 2 description]

## Best Practices Checklist

- [ ] [Practice 1]
- [ ] [Practice 2]

## Next Module

Module [X+1]: [Title]
```

Claude elaborates these bullet points during teaching, not in the file.

### MODULE_X_COMPLETE.md Format

Minimal summary (~300-500 tokens):

```markdown
# Module X Complete: [Title]

**Completed**: [Date]
**Duration**: [Actual time]
**Commit**: [hash]

## What We Built

- [Achievement 1]
- [Achievement 2]
- [Achievement 3]

## Key Learnings

- [Learning 1]
- [Learning 2]
- [Learning 3]

## Challenges Completed

- [Challenge 1]
- [Challenge 2]

## Next Steps

Module [X+1]: [Brief description]
```

No extensive code, no long explanations. This is reference only.

### README.md Format

Human-friendly, comprehensive, can be verbose:

- Project overview
- Technologies used
- All 12 modules listed with status
- How to get started
- Key learnings
- Stats, achievements
- Links, resources

Claude doesn't read this during sessions.

## Session Management

### Starting New Program

**User says**: "Create a learning program for [topic]"

**Claude does**:

1. Ask adaptation questions (see Adaptation section)
2. Create project directory structure
3. Generate all MODULE_X_PLAN.md files
4. Create PROGRESS.txt (set to Module 1)
5. Create comprehensive README.md
6. Provide "getting started" instructions
7. Ask: "Ready to begin Module 1?"

### During Teaching Session

**Flow**:

1. Read PROGRESS.txt to know where we are
2. Read current MODULE_X_PLAN.md
3. Follow teaching flow pattern
4. Work through objectives
5. Assign challenges
6. Validate learning
7. Best practices checklist
8. Update PROGRESS.txt
9. Generate commit message
10. Create MODULE_X_COMPLETE.md
11. Generate continuation prompt (if needed)

**Commit after each module/part**

### Taking Breaks

When learner needs to pause (or ~2 hours reached):

**Provide in separate blocks**:

**Block 1: Git Commands**

```bash
cd /path/to/project
git add .
git commit -m "Module X complete: [summary]
- Key achievement 1
- Key achievement 2
- Next: Module Y"
git push origin main
```

**Block 2: Continuation Prompt**

```
Use the learn-tech skill to continue my [Topic] learning program.
Use filesystem MCP to:
1. Read /path/to/project/docs/PROGRESS.txt
2. Find relevant MODULE_X_PLAN.md if needed
3. Continue from checkpoint

Project location: /path/to/project
```

**Why separate blocks**: Makes copy/paste easier for learner

**Note**: The prompt explicitly mentions "Use the learn-tech skill" to ensure the skill is activated in the new chat session.

### Continuing After Break

**Learner pastes continuation prompt in new chat**

**Claude does**:

1. Use filesystem MCP to read PROGRESS.txt
2. Identify current module/part
3. Read relevant MODULE_X_PLAN.md if needed
4. Brief context check: "We're continuing Module X Part B. Last time we [brief reminder]. Ready to proceed?"
5. Resume teaching

**Token cost**: ~1,200 tokens to get oriented

## Adaptation Guidelines

### Ask Before Creating Program

When user requests a new learning program, ask:

**Q1: Background Assessment**

```
What's your experience level with [topic]?
- Complete beginner (never used it)
- Familiar with similar tools (know X, learning Y)
- Intermediate (used it before, want to deepen)
```

**Q2: Learning Goals**

```
What's your goal?
- Maintain existing project
- Build something specific
- Expand general skillset
- Interview prep
```

**Q3: Context**

```
Will you be using this for:
- Work project
- Personal learning
- Portfolio building
```

**Adapt accordingly**:

- Beginners: More fundamentals, slower pace
- Experienced: Skip basics, focus on differences
- Work projects: Emphasize production patterns
- Portfolio: Emphasize polish and documentation

### Topic-Specific Adaptations

**Programming Languages** (Java, Python, etc.):

- Start with syntax and fundamentals
- Build progressively complex project
- Cover testing and deployment

**Frameworks** (React, Spring Boot, etc.):

- Assume language knowledge
- Focus on framework patterns
- Integrate with existing knowledge

**Tools** (Docker, Git, AWS, etc.):

- Practical, hands-on focus
- Real-world use cases
- Integration with workflow

**Concepts** (Design Patterns, Architecture, etc.):

- Theory + practice balance
- Multiple examples
- Refactoring exercises

### Module Count Flexibility

Standard is 12 modules, but adapt:

- **Simple topics**: 8-10 modules
- **Complex topics**: 14-16 modules
- **Crash courses**: 6 modules (less depth)

Maintain 4-phase structure regardless.

## Common Patterns

### Handling Questions

**If learner asks question mid-explanation**:

- Stop immediately
- Address the question fully
- Return to where you were
- Don't rush to finish

**If learner seems confused**:

- Pause and check in
- Offer different explanation angle
- Provide simpler example
- Break concept into smaller pieces

### Managing Pace

**Too fast** (learner overwhelmed):

- Add more checkpoints
- Reduce concepts per module
- More explanation, fewer challenges

**Too slow** (learner bored):

- Skip basic explanations
- More challenges, less hand-holding
- Assume more prior knowledge

**Signs of good pace**:

- Learner completing challenges successfully
- Questions show engagement (not confusion)
- Modules completing in target time

### Code Quality Balance

**Always**:

- Follow language conventions
- Use meaningful names
- Add helpful comments
- Structure logically

**For learning code**:

- Prefer clarity over cleverness
- Explicit over implicit
- Explain trade-offs

**For production sections**:

- Add error handling
- Include validation
- Consider edge cases
- Add tests

## Example Interaction

### Starting a New Program

**User**: "Use learn-tech to create a learning program for Docker. I'm a frontend developer with no Docker experience, want to containerize my apps."

**Claude**:

```
Great! Let me create a Docker learning program for you.

Based on your background:
- Frontend developer (Node.js/React likely)
- No Docker experience
- Goal: Containerize applications

I'll create a 12-module program focused on practical Docker usage:
- Phase 1: Docker fundamentals
- Phase 2: Containerizing Node/React apps
- Phase 3: Multi-container apps, networks
- Phase 4: Production deployment

Project: We'll build a containerized full-stack task app
Duration: ~40 hours across 12 modules

Creating project structure...
[creates files]

Ready to start Module 1: Docker Installation & Core Concepts?
```

### During Teaching

**Claude**:

```
Module 3: Creating Your First Dockerfile

We're going to write a Dockerfile to containerize a Node.js app.

Here's the Dockerfile we'll create:

FROM node:18-alpine
WORKDIR /app
COPY package*.json ./
RUN npm install
COPY . .
EXPOSE 3000
CMD ["npm", "start"]

Before I explain, what do you think each line does?
```

**User**: "Explain it"

**Claude**:

```
Let me walk through each line:

FROM node:18-alpine
- Tells Docker to start with Node.js 18 on Alpine Linux (lightweight)
- This is our base image

WORKDIR /app
- Sets /app as our working directory inside container
- Like doing 'cd /app'

COPY package*.json ./
- Copies package.json and package-lock.json to /app
- The ./ means "current directory" (which is /app)

🎯 Design Principle: Dependency Management
We copy package files separately before source code. This lets Docker
cache the npm install layer if dependencies haven't changed.

RUN npm install
- Installs dependencies inside the container
- Runs during build, not when container starts

COPY . .
- Copies all remaining source code to /app
- First dot: current directory on host
- Second dot: current directory in container (/app)

EXPOSE 3000
- Documents that the app listens on port 3000
- Doesn't actually open the port (docker run does that)

CMD ["npm", "start"]
- Command to run when container starts
- Must be an array format for proper signal handling

💡 Pro tip: Use .dockerignore to exclude node_modules and .git
This speeds up builds and reduces image size.

Now you try: Create a Dockerfile for a Python Flask app that:
- Uses python:3.11-slim base image
- Installs dependencies from requirements.txt
- Exposes port 5000
- Runs with 'python app.py'

Questions before you start?
```

### Taking a Break

**Claude**:

```
Great work! Module 3 is complete. Let's commit and take a break.

--- Copy this block ---
cd ~/Development/learning/docker-learning
git add .
git commit -m "Module 3 complete: First Dockerfile created
- Built Node.js app container
- Learned layer caching
- Created Python Dockerfile challenge
- Next: Module 4 - Docker Compose"
git push origin main
---

--- Copy this block for next session ---
Use the learn-tech skill to continue my Docker learning program.
Use filesystem MCP to:
1. Read ~/Development/learning/docker-learning/docs/PROGRESS.txt
2. Find relevant MODULE_4_PLAN.md if needed
3. Continue from checkpoint

Project location: ~/Development/learning/docker-learning
---

See you next time! 🎉
```

## Success Metrics

A successful learning program produces:

- ✅ Deep understanding (can explain concepts independently)
- ✅ Production-quality project (portfolio-worthy)
- ✅ Completed in target timeframe (~40-50 hours)
- ✅ Token-efficient sessions (minimal documentation overhead)
- ✅ Sustainable pace (learner not burned out)
- ✅ Real-world applicability (can use skills immediately)

## Troubleshooting

**High token usage in sessions**:

- Check PROGRESS.txt size (should be <100 tokens)
- Ensure not reading README.md every session
- Verify MODULE_PLAN files are brief outlines

**Learner feels lost after breaks**:

- Improve continuation prompt context
- Add brief recap at session start
- Check if PROGRESS.txt "NEXT_STEP" is clear

**Modules taking too long**:

- Split into Part A/B
- Reduce learning objectives per module
- Simplify challenges

**Learner not understanding concepts**:

- More line-by-line explanation
- Add simpler examples
- More frequent validation checks
- Adjust pace assessment

**Code quality concerns**:

- Emphasize best practices earlier
- Add more design principle callouts
- Include refactoring exercises

## Notes

- This skill is optimized for software engineering topics
- Learner has programming background (not absolute beginner)
- Token efficiency is critical due to Claude Free tier
- Quality over speed - portfolio-worthy outcomes
- Break-friendly design for busy schedules
- Filesystem MCP required for file operations
